<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>

<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8">
  <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
  <title>3.Dockerfile</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" href="https://stackedit.io/style.css" />
</head>

<body class="stackedit">
  <div class="stackedit__html"><h2 id="dockerfile">Dockerfile</h2>
<p>A Dockerfile is a text file that contains all the commands a user could call on the command line to assemble an image. It is used to define the steps needed to create a Docker image, which is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of software that includes everything needed to run an application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries, and settings.</p>
<p>The Dockerfile is a text file with a specific format. It starts with a FROM instruction, which specifies the base image to use. The base image is a pre-built image that contains a working operating system and other software. The FROM instruction is followed by a series of instructions that tell Docker how to build the image.</p>
<p>Some common instructions in a Dockerfile include:</p>
<ul>
<li><strong>COPY</strong>: Copies files from the host machine to the container</li>
<li><strong>RUN</strong>: Executes a command in the container</li>
<li><strong>ENV</strong>: Sets an environment variable in the container</li>
<li><strong>CMD</strong>: Specifies the command to run when the container starts</li>
</ul>
<p>Once the Dockerfile is created, it can be used to build the image using the <code>docker build</code> command. The <code>docker build</code> command takes the Dockerfile as its input and creates a new image with the specified name.</p>
<p>Here is an example of a Dockerfile that creates a simple image with the <code>nginx</code> web server:</p>
<pre><code>FROM nginx:latest

COPY index.html /usr/share/nginx/html

CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]

</code></pre>
<p>This Dockerfile starts with the <code>FROM nginx:latest</code> instruction, which specifies that the base image is the latest version of the <code>nginx</code> image. The next instruction, <code>COPY index.html /usr/share/nginx/html</code>, copies the <code>index.html</code> file from the host machine to the <code>/usr/share/nginx/html</code> directory in the container. The final instruction, <code>CMD ["nginx", "-g", "daemon off;"]</code>, specifies that the command to run when the container starts is <code>nginx -g daemon off;</code>.</p>
<p>This Dockerfile can be used to build an image with the following command:</p>
<pre><code>docker build -t mynginx .

</code></pre>
<p>The <code>-t</code> flag specifies the name of the image to build. In this case, the image will be named <code>mynginx</code>. The <code>.</code> at the end of the command tells Docker to use the current directory as the context for the build.</p>
<p>Once the image is built, it can be run using the <code>docker run</code> command:</p>
<pre><code>docker run -d -p 80:80 mynginx

</code></pre>
<p>The <code>-d</code> flag tells Docker to run the container in detached mode. This means that the container will run in the background and the terminal will be returned to the user. The <code>-p</code> flag maps the port 80 on the host machine to port 80 on the container. This means that requests to port 80 on the host machine will be forwarded to port 80 on the container.</p>
<p>The <code>mynginx</code> image will now be running and serving the <code>index.html</code> file on port 80. You can access the file by opening a web browser and navigating to <a href="http://localhost:80">http://localhost:80</a>.</p>
<p>Dockerfiles are a powerful tool for creating and managing Docker images. They can be used to create images for any type of software, from simple web servers to complex applications. By using Dockerfiles, you can ensure that your images are consistent and reproducible.</p>
<h2 id="the-syntax-for-writing-a-dockerfile-and-format">The syntax for writing a Dockerfile and Format</h2>
<h3 id="from"><strong>1. FROM</strong></h3>
<p>A FROM statement defines which image to download and start from. It must be the first command in your Dockerfile. A Dockerfile can have multiple FROM statements which means the Dockerfile produces more than one image.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>FROM java: 8</p>
<h3 id="maintainer"><strong>2. MAINTAINER</strong></h3>
<p>This statement is a kind of documentation, which defines the author who is creating this Dockerfile or who should you contact if it has bugs.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>MAINTAINER Firstname Lastname <a href="mailto:example@geeksforgeeks.com">example@geeksforgeeks.com</a></p>
<h3 id="run"><strong>3. RUN</strong></h3>
<p>The RUN statement defines running a command through the shell, waiting for it to finish, and saving the result. It tells what process will be running inside the container at the run time.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>RUN unzip install.zip /opt/install<br>
RUN echo hello</p>
<h3 id="add"><strong>4. ADD</strong></h3>
<p>If we define to add some files, ADD statement is used. It basically gives instructions to copy new files, directories, or remote file URLs and then adds them to the filesystem of the image.<br>
To sum up it can add local files, contents of tar archives as well as URLs.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>Local Files: ADD <a href="http://run.sh">run.sh</a> /run.sh<br>
Tar Archives: ADD project.tar.gz /install/<br>
URLs: ADD <a href="https://project.example-gfg.com/downloads/1.0/testingproject.rpm/test">https://project.example-gfg.com/downloads/1.0/testingproject.rpm/test</a></p>
<h3 id="env"><strong>5. ENV</strong></h3>
<p>ENV statement sets the environment variables both during the build and when running the result. It can be used in the Dockerfile and any scripts it calls. It can be used in the Dockerfile as well as any scripts that the Dockerfile calls. These are also persistent with the container and can be referred to at any moment.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>ENV URL_POST=<a href="http://production.example-gfg.com">production.example-gfg.com</a></p>
<h3 id="entrypoint"><strong>6. ENTRYPOINT</strong></h3>
<p>It specifies the starting of the expression to use when starting your container. Simply ENTRYPOINT specifies the start of the command to run. If your container acts as a command-line program, you can use ENTRYPOINT.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>ENTRYPOINT ["/start.sh"]</p>
<h3 id="cmd"><strong>7. CMD</strong></h3>
<p>CMD specifies the whole command to run. We can say CMD is the default argument passed into the ENTRYPOINT. The main purpose of the CMD command is to launch the software required in a container.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>CMD [“program-foreground”]<br>
CMD [“executable”, “program1”, “program2”]</p>
<p><strong>Note:</strong>  If you have both ENVIRONMENT and CMD, they are combined together.</p>
<h3 id="expose"><strong>8. EXPOSE</strong></h3>
<p>EXPOSE statement maps a port into the container. The ports can be TCP or UDP but by default, it is TCP.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>EXPOSE 3030</p>
<h3 id="volume"><strong>9. VOLUME</strong></h3>
<p>The VOLUME statement defines shared volumes or ephemeral volumes depending upon whether you have one or two arguments.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<ol>
<li>If you have two arguments, it maps a host path into a container path.<br>
VOLUME ["/host/path" “/container/path/”]</li>
<li>If you have one arguments, it creates a volume that can be inherited by the later containers.<br>
VOLUME ["/shared-data"]</li>
</ol>
<h3 id="workdir"><strong>10. WORKDIR</strong></h3>
<p>As the name suggests, WORKDIR sets the directory that the container starts in. Its main purpose is to set the working directory for all future Dockerfile commands.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>WORKDIR /directory-name</p>
<h3 id="user"><strong>11. USER</strong></h3>
<p>It sets which user’s container will run as. This can be useful if you have shared network directories involved that assume a fixed username or a fixed user number.</p>
<p><strong>Example:</strong></p>
<p>USER geeksforgeeks<br>
USER 4000</p>
<h3 id="arg">12. ARG</h3>
<p>A variable that can be provided at build time is defined by an ARG Instruction. Once it has been specified in the Dockerfile, you can specify it using the –build-arg switch when creating the image. The Dockerfile supports multiple ARG instructions. The only instruction in the Dockerfile that can come before the FROM instruction is ARG.</p>
<blockquote>
<p>After the image is created, ARG values are not accessible. An ARG variable value won’t be accessible to a running container.</p>
</blockquote>
<h3 id="example">Example</h3>
<p>ARG image_name=latest<br>
FROM centos:$image_name<br>
docker build -t : --build-arg image_name=centos8 .</p>
<h2 id="best-practices-for-writing-dockerfiles">Best practices for writing Dockerfiles</h2>
<ol>
<li>As a base image, use official images. And whenever it is possible, use Alpine images as a base image.</li>
<li>Don’t copy unnecessary files and folders or install/use unnecessary packages of software.</li>
<li>Running a container process as root is not recommended. As a non-root user, launch the application container process.</li>
<li>Reduce the number of image layers as much as you can.</li>
<li>Wherever possible, try to use multi-stage Docker files to reduce the size of the image.</li>
</ol>
<h2 id="creating-a-new-dockerfile-for-maven">Creating a New Dockerfile for Maven</h2>
<p>#Using offical maven image as a parent image<br>
FROM maven:3.5-jdk-8-alpine as build</p>
<p>#Setting the working directory to /app<br>
WORKDIR /app</p>
<p>#Copy the current directory contents into the container at current directory<br>
COPY . .</p>
<p>#Install the mvn command for maven<br>
RUN mvn install</p>
<p>By using the above Dockerfile we can build an image of  <a href="https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/introduction-apache-maven-build-automation-tool-java-projects/">Maven</a>  we are setting a Maven alpine image as a base image with the help of  <strong>FROM</strong>  command and with the help of  <strong>WORKDIR</strong>  setting the working directory for Maven and copy the required files and folders to maven we are using the <strong>COPY</strong>  command and  <strong>RUN</strong> command can download the required commands in the image we are downloading mvn command.</p>
<h2 id="faqs-on-dockerfile">FAQ’S on Dockerfile</h2>
<h3 id="when-should-i-use-dockerfile">When should I use Dockerfile?</h3>
<p>One should use a Dockerfile when there’s a need to distribute/collaborate on the app’s operating system with a team. Use Dockerfile as the version control system for the entire app’s OS. Or use Dockerfile to run the code to the laptop in the same environment as the server you are working on.</p>
<h3 id="is-dockerfile-a-text-file">Is Dockerfile a text file?</h3>
<p>Dockerfile is a text document containing all the commands the user requires to call on the command line to assemble an image. With the help of a Dockerfile, users can create an automated build that executes several command-line instructions in succession.</p>
<h3 id="how-do-i-create-a-simple-dockerfile">How do I create a simple Dockerfile?</h3>
<p>To create a Dockerfile, set up Docker and Docker Hub. Create the original Docker container and then create a file on it. Make changes to the container, and finally, create a new image.</p>
<h3 id="what-is-dockerfile-language">What is Dockerfile language?</h3>
<p>Go language is used to write Docker. A Dockerfile is a text file that contains collections of instructions and commands that will be automatically executed in sequence in the docker environment for building a new docker image.</p>
<h3 id="what-is-docker-compose-vs.-dockerfile">What is Docker compose vs. Dockerfile?</h3>
<p>The key difference between Docker compose, and Docker is that the Docker contents describe how to create and build a Docker image, while Docker compose is a command that runs Docker containers based on settings described in a docker-composed.yaml file.</p>
<h3 id="what-is-a-.dockerignore-file">What is a .dockerignore file?</h3>
<p>A .dockerignore file allows you to specify a list of files or directories that Docker is to ignore during the build process. It is similar to a .gitignore file, which is used when you build Git repositories. You can specify the list of files and directories inside the .dockerignore file.</p>
<h3 id="how-do-i-commit-a-docker-container">How do I commit a docker container?</h3>
<p>First, you need to pull a docker image. Then deploy the container, modify it and commit the changes to the image. When you commit to changes, you essentially create a new image with an additional layer that modifies the base image layer.</p>
<h3 id="what-is-docker-context">What is docker context?</h3>
<p>With a docker context, importing and exporting context on different machines with the Docker installed gets easier. One can also use a docker context export command to export an existing context to a file, which can be imported to another machine with the docker client installed.</p>
<h3 id="what-is-the-use-of-docker-in-devops">What is the use of Docker in DevOps?</h3>
<p>A Docker container image in DevOps is a lightweight, executable, and standalone package of software that includes everything needed to run an app, runtime, system tools, settings, system libraries, and code. Containers simplify the build/test/deploy pipelines in DevOps.</p>
<h3 id="is-dockerfile-copy-recursive">Is Dockerfile COPY recursive?</h3>
<p>COPY and ADD are the two commands that Docker provides for copying files from the host to the Docker image when building it. COPY command copies files recursively, given explicit source and destination directories or files.</p>
<h3 id="is-dockerfile-a-docker-image">Is Dockerfile a Docker image?</h3>
<p>A Docker image is built automatically by reading the instructions from a Dockerfile, a text file containing all commands needed to build a given image. A Dockerfile adheres to a specific set of instructions and format, producing a Docker image when you build it.</p>
</div>
</body>

</html>
